The biblical commands to be emotional
about God
are many and strong. I just picked out a few.
Make a joyful noise, shout for joy, sing for joy, be jubilant with joy, clap hands and shout, exult in the.
In the Lord. Stand in awe. Fear the Lord. Be glad in the Lord. Boast in the Lord. Cry out to the Lord. Taste the Lord. Make melody.
Melody to the Lord. Praise with trumpets and lute and harp and timbrels and dance and strings and pipe and loud clashing cymbals.
I don't know how often you think of the Bible commanding your emotions.
But it does.
Not just your thoughts or your behavior, but your affections too.
I'm Dan Kruver.
And in this episode of Light and Truth, we'll be talking about
John Piper walks us through a flood of scriptures that call us not just to know God,
But to feel deeply about him.
This seminar was originally delivered on Wednesday evening, September 19, 1990.
Let me just jump on right there. that's biblical.
it's biblical to do that to look somebody in the eye and say praise the lord is a biblical thing
rather than just always saying, "I praise you, Lord."
it's biblical to say praise the Lord
Quinn because he hears that you hear that i hear that and we we go up together
But with regard to the larger issue, the only answer I know is to just do what I'm doing.
In other words,, I reckon with that secularisation of the mindset of all of us,
It is very man-centered by and large, and very at odds with the radical God-centeredness of God himself, and that he is supreme in his own affections. That's just.
So that's just an utterly foreign notion to unbelievers and most believers who have been schooled in a man-centered view of the gospel. And so my approach is to just pray.
write books and teach this and preach sermons and take some speaking engagements and everywhere i go hold up the supremacy of god until it's just a broken
Broken record in people's ears that's all they think about when they think about me
I've been reading these letters that people write me on the 10th anniversary. They all say the same thing.
Thank you for your vision of God. Boom, boom, boom.
And that's the way I'll go to my deathbed, I suppose. I hope that at my funeral in
X numbers of years, somebody will stand here and say,
what we thank God most for is his vision of God in John Piper. That's all I know to do with my life is just keep
Just keep putting an alternative vision out there before people.
But now I want to talk about affections here before we run out of time.
I've stressed truth real hard, Neil. I know that there are...
Are just such different kinds of people that are here.
and some of you
Love doctrine
And some of you,
Love
Emotion.
And find doctrine threatening and divisive.
And others find emotion
Uncontrolled and worrisome and threatening.
So I'm I've just said a lot for all you.
Doctrine people.
And now I'm going to say something for the other type.
the truth is to be loved with the heart and not just affirmed with the mind i'm not going to take the time to read this but this says that people are going to be swept away in the judgment of God
The judgment because they did not.
Love the truth
Love the truth, not just believe it or affirm it, but love the truth.
Jesus
Gives
Awesome warnings to lukewarm people.
He will spit,
Us out of his mouth.
If we are Luke,
Warm.
We should fear
Our lukewarm emotions.
The biblical commands to be emotional.
about God
are many and strong. I just picked out a few.
Make a joyful noise, shout for joy, sing for joy, be jubilant with joy, clap hands and shout, exult in.
Out in the Lord. Stand in awe. Fear the Lord. Be glad in the Lord. Boast in the Lord. Cry out to the Lord. Taste the Lord. Make melody.
Elodie to the Lord, praise with trumpets and lute and harp and timbrels and dance and strings and pipe and loud clashing cymbals.
That does not fit some emotions.
And the people who have emotions that that doesn't fit,
Should pray.
That God would help them grow.
Emotion by definition
Is less controllable than thought.
Here we come up against something that was raised at the leadership retreat.
How do you...
How do you keep weird things from happening if you believe in emotion? And that emotion should be, like Edward says, raised to its,
Height.
I mean, won't people just start barking like dogs?
In fact, I forgot to bring Desiring God in here. On page eighty one of Desiring God,
I quote Charles Chauncey, who was the
dignified Boston minister
in eighteen forty three who really criticized the revival that was breaking out largely under edward's influence and he just listed the excesses of.
of howling and rolling in the aisle and barking like dogs and...
Screaming and violent, shaking.
And Edwards had to come to terms with, well, now what are we going to do with this?
And Edwards insisted
That all that list of things did not nullify the
The validity of the true work of God in this revival.
Though he opposed excesses, and tried to.
To avoid them, he wouldn't let Chauncey say,
since that's happening this is not of God
And as I was thinking on that today, it occurred to me that emotion is,
Less controllable,
Then thought,
it is the spontaneous movement of the heart not the controlled movement of the heart
No one says, "I will now produce gratitude."
Or.
Uh...
I will now produce adoration, or I will now, in a measured way, produce fear of God.
Or?
I will now in a nice
Careful, limited form,
Produce joy.
in my heart or excitement I will now get excited
Controlled excitement. Here I go. I will get.
Excited.
nobody does that absolutely nobody
You may think you are, but you're not.
Nobody
Produces genuine emotion with a controlled act of willpower.
Except in a very indirect way by putting yourself in a situation where emotion may be kindled.
It is there, this emotion is there because of some sight of glory,
Or some wonderful application of truth
To the heart by the holy
Spirit,
Therefore,
if the bible insists on emotion in worship which it does again and again and again
If the Bible insists on emotion in worship,
It insists that we take the risks
That come with less control atmosphere.
Of what mighty rocked?
From the heart.
I mean either you are going to opt
For enough control so that you never run the risk of something unsavory erupting,
And in that way, cap emotion.
Or you're going to accept the risk and say we're going to uncap emotion.
And?
Make the best of it.
and I think there's a way to make the best of it namely
The safety parameters are provided by strong doctrinal commitments,
The strength and breadth and depth of the church's leadership.
And I should add here, good teaching.
On this sort of thing.
So that what we saw at the leadership retreat, for example, were some new kinds of expressions,
Of emotional response to something.
And some were very disturbed by this and others.
Tom Redessa.
Absolutely.
Amazing letter, without mentioning the name at the staff meeting the other day of what God had done in a person who wasn't up front.
But was off by herself.
And was deeply, deeply affected by the Holy Spirit that night.
And I think what will guard us from
Thinking that those kinds of emotional things like shaking or sobbing,
or becoming weak and having to sit down are somehow the be all and end all is good solid teaching that is sanctification that matters and a leadership
Ship and a talk congregation who just doesn't.
Do some go bananas when they see something. Go ahead, doc.
Really agree that it's been perverted.
And I think one of the reasons it's been perverted is because the absence of this safety.
Parameters here
Strong doctrinal biblical teaching,
And strength and breath and depth,
Of an accountable leadership.
So that no one man is going off doing his own thing.
And no congregation is without,
A watch care, eldership.
That simply has the guts
To call somebody to an account who's causing a disturbance or doing something unsavory or unhelpful.
That's the sort of thing that needs to be
In place.
I wonder though
Doug, if there might not be.
As many people who might be
Touched,
And moved.
By the genuine working of the Holy Spirit in people's lives,
As there are people who might be offended.
I don't have any
Um,
paradigm I'm looking for
Emotionally.
On Sunday morning, I want X number of people to sob or.
I want a lot of shaking or
Uh,
I want
freedom.
I want freedom.
I mean,
Frankly,
I don't know of too many places in the Bible that express your concern.
But I know hundreds of places in the Bible that express that concern right there.
Shout!
Clap.
Sing, make a joyful noise, lift your hands, play the loud cymbals.
That's all over the place.
Whereas, be careful not to offend anybody is scarcely to be found.
Little bit
But not too much, Mike.
I assume we communicate
Uh,
Pretty s.
Strong expectations of people in one kind of group or another, just by tradition.
Or
Verbal statements or order of service in the bulletin or whatever
Which,
We must, because I have numerous people coming to me and saying,
I wanted to say amen this morning.
Well,
What did I say?
That kept you from saying amen.
I mean something's being communicated here.
uh that that uh they they're not free to say right on.
um we have a fairly controlled atmosphere on sunday morning.
And I would like people to feel free to give me a lot more.
Verbal feedback. and I can clearly imagine it getting out of hand. I spent three and a half hours in a service on Sunday down at Bethesda Baptist.
I was the last of nine preachers to preach.
And, uh,
and they said.
Many interesting things in response, and I put a lot of them in the star this week, as I reflected out loud on.
So, on that experience.
Everything can get out of hand. everything can be imagined.
As an awful destruction of what we cherish at Bethlehem.
But if you want to be
the biblical it seems to me like we need to just
Provide an atmosphere in which
There can.
be a more free expression i'd like to have an atmosphere in which nobody condemns anybody for not raising his hand
And nobody condemns anybody for raising his hands.
I mean, that's the kind of freedom I'd like to have. So that if the person next to you goes like this, you don't say, oh, good grief.
what are they trying to do?
Uh...
That you just don't do that or if we had room
that there would be a little spot in the service maybe where we would say if you want to stand or kneel or sit for these three minutes.
of quietness or worship singing. Do that. And then the person who's sitting wouldn't feel indicted.
Because the person next to him turned around and and got real serious. like you're unspiritual and I'm spiritual. See,
I'd like the kind of freedom where we just would not be
Labeling each other and
Fearing each other and criticizing each other.
That's a little bit, maybe. Does that help?
David?
well i'd
I judge.
I'm one of the leaders of this church.
i have the doctrinal oversight and i have responsibility for keeping order on sunday morning i think i judge first of all by who it is
And second by the spear of the moment.
Did seem right.
Is it an ugly intrusion?
And then I'd probably say, "Okay, don't take too long now."
Go ahead. let's see. and then I would be. I would be looking.
To others with me,
To get vibrations here is is this
In tune with God, or is this weird off the wall?
Of the flesh.
and and probably if it got carried on too long i'd say okay we can't keep going that long because the spirits of prophets are in the control of prophets you can sit down now i've got a prophetic word.
word too.
that I'm going to give.
Or if it was really of the Lord and was moving people,
We would stop stop and pray over it and.
I think I could handle that.
i've thought often you know about what we've we've handled some pretty funny things here on sunday morning.
Our time is up let me pray with you before you go
And just ask God to be giving us balance.
And wisdom in these things,
And I think the combination of truth,
And emotion,
White hot affection and razor sharp insight
If we keep saying yes to both of those,
The Lord's going to keep us on balance here.
Father, I pray that that be true.
That you'd really help us.
Help each other that we love each other.
That we'd have the kind of
Freedom in you to pour out our hearts.
In.
Affection to you in song.
And in prayer,
And in meditation,
And that you would meet us in great power on Sunday morning, and so demonstrate your power that outsiders coming in, no matter what they saw, would themselves.
Cells feel the power of the Holy Spirit upon their own hearts and not just be able to sit back and watch like spectators. Grant, oh God, I pray that that kind of move
Of the Spirit, be among us as you teach us to worship.
In Jesus' name, amen.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching
to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
i'm your host, dan kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our nine-part series, The Shape of Worship in a Changing World.
With a seminar titled:
Worship at the crossroads.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit DesiringGod.org.